[Substance]

id :: 80
name :: GHB
url :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/ghb/ghb.shtml
category :: Chemicals
commonNames :: G; Sodium Oxybate; Xyrem, Alcover
effectsClassification :: Depressant Intoxicant
chemicalName :: gamma-hydroxybutyrate
description :: GHB is a sedative used both as a prescription sleep-aid and as a recreational intoxicant. It is known for its ability to induce a short (several hour) coma-like sleep at high doses. A number of GHB-related deaths in combination with its addiction potential led to it being controlled by Federal law in 1999.
imageURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/ghb/images/ghb_summary1.jpg
basicsURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/ghb/ghb_basics.shtml
effectsURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/ghb/ghb_effects.shtml
imagesURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/ghb/ghb_images.shtml
healthURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/ghb/ghb_health.shtml
lawURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/ghb/ghb_law.shtml
doseURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/ghb/ghb_dose.shtml
chemistryURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/ghb/ghb_chemistry.shtml

[Basics]
description :: GHB (gamma hydroxybutyrate) is a naturally occurring component of human cells and in wine. It is used most commonly in the form of a chemical salt (Na-GHB or K-GHB) which is taken recreationally as a depressant with effects quite similar to those of alcohol. These salts are powders but are most often mixed with water for recreational use. While GHB is most notorious for a few cases where it has been given to unsuspecting individuals, it is more commonly used as a recreational intoxicant like alcohol, as a sleep-aid, or as a supplement by body-builders.  One of the major concerns with GHB is that the recreational dosage range is narrow and even small overdoses can cause temporary unrousable unconsciousness (a type of coma) and large overdoses (poisonings) can be life-threatening. There are two other chemicals which are used as GHB equivalents: 1,4-butanediol and gamma butyrlactone. [ Main GHB Vault ]
descriptionSections :: dose	A standard oral recreational dose of pure GHB powder is between 1-3 grams, though some people use as much as 4-5 g in a single dose: especially frequent users who have developed a tolerance (GHB is used orally and is not injected or insufflated). Unfortunately, GHB is most frequently found in liquid form of widely variable concentration. 1 gram of GHB powder can be dissolved into as little as 1 ml of water (though sludgy at that concentration, this makes 5 g per teaspoon) or a much greater volume and there is virtually no way to tell the concentration once it's in liquid form. The only way to know the concentration of liquid GHB is to know and trust information provided by the source. Users should be extremely careful about GHB dosages as even small overdoses can result in temporarily unrousable sleep.
price	When purchased in single doses at a club, GHB is generally sold for a couple of dollars per dose. When purchased in larger quantities (or in kits before it became illegal) it is available for $10-$50 per 100 grams.
law	GHB is illegal to possess or sell in the United States. It became schedule I (federally) in March, 2000 though it was scheduled in many states between 1997 and 1999. Gamma butyrlactone (GBL) is not federally scheduled but is now a list 1 chemical requiring that paperwork be filed for large sales. GBL is scheduled in some states.
chemistry	GHB is most commonly produced by combining gamma butyrlactone and a strong base such as sodium hydroxide (lye). These two substances react chemically and form the unique chemical GHB.
pharmacology	Pharmacology Summary Needed.
production	Production Summary Needed.
history	GHB was developed in the early 60s as a human anaesthetic, but was discontinued due to unwanted side effects. It's use as a sleep aid and body building supplement in the 80s and as a recreational psychoactive in the 90s led to it being scheduled in the U.S. in March of 2000.
terminology	The Substance:GHB; G; Liquid X; Liquid E; GBH; Gamma-oh; Blue Verve. The Experience:G-ing (pronounced "Gee-ing").
effects :: The effects of GHB at recreational doses are physically quite similar to those of alcohol. At lower doses effects include relaxation, reduction of social inhibitions, decreased motor skills, mood lift and other effects similar to mild alcohol intoxication. At higher recreational doses effects can include dizziness, difficulty focusing the eyes, positive mood changes, increased appreciation of music, dancing, and talking, slurring of speech, nausea, and grogginess. The line between high recreational dose and overdose can be a narrow one. At the overdose level, individuals may experience extreme grogginess (nodding in and out of consciousness) or unconsciousness, extreme dizziness and disorientation, and vomiting. During higher overdoses (poisonings), users may experience unconsciousness, convulsions, vomiting, and potentially depressed breathing
effectsSections :: onset	As with alcohol and many other substances, the onset of GHB will be affected by how much and how recently one has eaten. Generally some effects begin between 10-20 minutes and continue to get stronger for 30-60 minutes.
duration	The primary effects of GHB last approximately 1.5 - 2.5 hours. For many people there is an additional period of time (1-2 hrs) of more subtle effects. Some recreational users consume GHB in a manner similar to alcohol, sipping it slowly over an evening rather than drinking a full dose all at once. In this case the duration will be longer as the period of ingestion is stretched out over time. Some lingering effects continue for hours longer.
visuals	Visuals Summary Needed.
problems :: Unfortunately, GHB has a few prominent problems which, in combination, can be quite dangerous. The difference between a recreational dose and a mild overdose (temporarily unrousable sleep) can be as little as 1-2 grams, the equivalent of a single dosage unit. Combining GHB with alcohol can lead to nausea, vomiting, and unconsciousness at even lower levels. Also, because GHB often comes in liquid form and because the concentration of this liquid is difficult to determine, it is relatively common for people to accidentally take a larger dose of GHB than they think they are taking. Everyone thinks it can't happen to them, but people should be extremely careful about knowing the concentration of the material they use and about measurement techniques. GHB should be stored in a container which could never be mistaken for a beverage container and liquid GHB should be colored blue so it can not be mistaken for water. Powdered GHB is much less likely to be accidentally ingested.  In addition to the problems around dosage, GHB also has a problem with the specific effects of an overdose. At higher overdose levels, GHB can produce both unconsciousness and vomiting. This can be an extremely dangerous combination. Vomiting while laying unconscious on one's back can lead to aspiration (inhalation) of the vomit which can cause suffocation and damage to the lungs. Individuals who are unconscious and vomiting should be turned on their side and their airway cleared so they do not inhale their vomit, and should be constantly monitored until help arrives or they become conscious. People who find themselves alone in this situation should try to position themselves so vomit inhalation can not happen if they fall unconscious.  Beyond the respiration of vomit, it has been suggested that GHB poisonings (high overdoses) can cause death but this is not a well understood or researched issue. The DEA reports over 60 GHB related deaths in the U.S. over the past 5 years, about 2/3 of these are poly-drug mortalities while 1/3 are GHB only.  Another problem associated with GHB is the issue of rape & assault that goes along with chemicals which can be added to drinks and given to unsuspecting victims.
problemsSections :: contraindications	Taking GHB with alcohol causes cumulative depressive effects as well as increased nausea and vomiting. This can be an extremely dangerous combination. Avoid mixing GHB with other depressants and opiates.
addiction	The addiction potential of GHB is not well known, but from reports it appears that GHB can be both physically addicting and mentally habituating for a small percentage of users. We have received reports from a few individuals of severe withdrawal symptoms lasting for several days following repeated daily use. These symptoms include a strong desire to repeat the experience, difficulty sleeping, vertigo, and worrisome chest pains. We have not received any reports from users who find it difficult to stay off GHB once the withdrawal period is over.
long	Long Term Health Problems Summary Needed.
death	Risk of Death Summary Needed.

[Effects]
duration :: GHB Duration
Oral
Total Duration	1.5 - 2.5 hrs
Onset	10 - 20 mins
Coming Up	15 - 30 mins
Plateau	45 - 90 mins
Coming Down	15 - 30 mins
&nbsp;	&nbsp;
After Effects	2 - 4 hrs
Hangover / Day After	- - -
positiveEffects :: There is currently no Effects List for this substance.
neutralEffects :: null
negativeEffects :: null
description :: GHB (gamma-hydroxy butyrate) is an intoxicating chemical with medical, recreational, and potentially entheogenic uses. GHB affects the release of dopamine in the brain, usually causing effects ranging from relaxation to sleep at low doses. Overall, the effect characterization is extremely similar to alcohol, with the duration slightly longer, the hangover effects (for most people) slightly less, and the unpleasant and dangerous overdose effect of possibly causing temporarily unrousable sleep (coma) at doses just over those that some people enjoy ingesting.	
The effects of GHB are heavily affected by one's body weight, interactions with other chemicals, and one's individual reaction. Some people find GHB to be useful for treating insomnia, others use it as part of the process of breaking alcohol addiction, some find it a pleasant alcohol replacement. Many people who try GHB don't like its somewhat drowsy, slightly dizzy, alcohol-like character.	
Warning : GHB use can be extremely dangerous. Please read the warnings on the GHB Health Page	
GHB normally tastes very salty and most like baking soda. Improperly manufactured GHB can also contain contaminants which may be toxic and add a slightly more 'chemical' or 'caustic' flavor to the material. Be safe. Know your source.	
Setting GHB dosage is sometimes tricky and improper dosage can have unpleasant, unhealthy, and monetarily costly side effects. See the dosage page for more information.	
Low Dose:	A low dose of GHB (usually from .5 to 1.5 grams) often causes effects similar to those of 1-3 drinks of alcohol. Users can feel a mild relaxation, increased sociability, slightly decreased motor skills, sometimes mild dizziness, and other effects similar to mild alcohol intoxication. Even at low doses it is improper and dangerous for GHB users to drive or operate heavy machinery.	
Medium Dose:	A medium dose of GHB (usually from 1 to 2.5 grams) increases the relaxing effects and the physical disequilibrium experienced. Some people report an increased appreciation for music, dancing, or talking. Many people report positive mood changes. Some slurring of speech, silliness, and slight incoherency are also common. Others report increased feelings of nausea and grogginess. Some users of GHB report pro-sexual effects: an increase in tactile sensitivity, relaxation, increased male erectile capacity, and heightened experience of orgasm. Some women report that GHB makes orgasms harder to achieve.	
Heavy Dose:	A heavy dose of GHB (from 2.5 + grams) can increase feelings of disequilibrium in many people to point of feeling quite ill. Many people accidentally move from Medium Dose to Over Dose, only passing through Heavy Dose for a few minutes. One reason that GHB has gained notoriety as a Club Drug is that some people experience extremely positive feelings on Heavy Doses of GHB. Reports of euphoria, feeling music deeply, joyous dancing, and other very positive effects are common among aficionados. People who report these effects also describe how difficult finding one's personal dose range can be to achieve these effects. An extra quarter (.25) gram can be the difference between euphoria and vomiting.	
Overdose:	The Overdose range for GHB can be as little as 2 grams, based on body weight and individual sensitivity. One major problem with GHB as an underground recreational substance is that it has a sharp dose-response curve, which can be difficult to manage with the various non-standard preparations available to the uninformed buyer. Another major problem is that uninformed users often mix GHB with alcohol, which drastically increases the chance of vomiting and unconsciousness. An overdose can consist of mild to extreme nausea and dizziness, and vomiting. It can also be characterized by a strong drowsy feeling followed by an temporarily unrouseable sleep (sometimes characterized as a type of coma) for 1-4 hours. Some Overdoses of GHB mix vomiting with unconsciousness which is an extremely dangerous combination for obvious reasons. When using GHB (or any substance), it is important to remember to let someone who is with you know what you're doing, so if you experience Overdose effects, they can react appropriately and let any health professionals who become involved know what substance was involved.	
Poisoning:	We're defining a level dosage above Overdose in order to highlight the effects of extreme overdoses. While many Overdoses consist mainly of heavy sleep, some are life-threatening. GHB Poisonings are characterized by very low breathing, convulsions or twitching, vomiting, complete non-responsive even to 'deep pain', fixed pupils, etc. GHB poisoning victims should receive medical care immediately.	
After Effects:	Some people feel drowsy, sleepy, or groggy after the effects wear off or the next day after ingestion. The hangover from low and medium doses of GHB is usually mild or non-existent, although some people report feeling slightly 'fuzzy headed' the next day. Some people also report feeling refreshed, happier, and more alert the day after use. For some people, using GHB more than once a week causes significantly increased negative after effects.	
See GHB Overdoses & Poisonings for a description of overdose effects.
experienceReports :: null

[Images]
imageEntryList :: GHB Bottles	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_image.php?i=ghb/ghb_bottles1.jpg	Color photo of two bottles of GHB.	Photo by Erowid. &copy; 2000 Erowid.org
Commercial GHB Bottle	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_image.php?i=ghb/ghb_bottle2.jpg	Color photo of a small commercially sold bottle of GHB.	Photo by Erowid. &copy; 2004 Erowid.org
2 Commercial GHB Bottles	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_image.php?i=ghb/ghb_bottle3.jpg	Color photo showing the fronts of two commercially sold bottles of GHB.	Photo by Erowid. &copy; 2004 Erowid.org
2 Commercial GHB Bottles	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_image.php?i=ghb/ghb_bottle3-2.jpg	Color photo showing the backs of two commercially sold bottles of GHB.	Photo by Erowid. &copy; 2004 Erowid.org
GHB Vials	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_image.php?i=ghb/ghb_vial__i2006e1744_disp.jpg	2 vials each containing 5ml of liquid GHB as sold on the black market in the Netherlands. [The Netherlands]	Photo by Rob. &copy; 2007 Erowid.org
GHB Kit	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_image.php?i=ghb/ghb_kit1.jpg	Color photo of a collection of GHB and related chemicals.	Photo by Anonymous Photographer. &copy; 2000 Erowid.org
GHB Powder	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_image.php?i=ghb/ghb_powder1.jpg	Color photo of a bag of Na-GHB powder labelled "Sodium Oxybate". (Zurich, Switzerland, 2002).	Photo by el dopa. &copy; 2002 Erowid.org
Prescription GHB (Xyrem) Packaging	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_image.php?i=ghb/ghb_xyrem__i2008e1371_disp.jpg	Prescription GHB (Xyrem) packaging including box, 180 ml bottle, and measuring syringe.	Photo by CPP. &copy; 2009 Erowid.org
GBL Advertisement - "Gamma-G"	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_image.php?i=ghb/gbl_advertisement1.jpg	Color scan of advertisement for a GBL containing product "Gamma-G" in November 1998 High Times.	Photo by Murple, &copy; 2001 Erowid.org- Distribute Freely.
gamma-Butyrolactone	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_image.php?i=ghb/gbl_bottle__i2003e0621_disp.jpg	Close-up of a large bottle of gamma-Butyrolactone. [Poland]	Photo by hyperreal.info. &copy; 2009 Erowid.org
GHB 2D Molecule	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_molecule.php?i=ghb/ghb_2d.gif	Still 2D image of the GHB molecule.	Image by Erowid. &copy; 2000 Erowid.org
GHB 3D Molecule	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_molecule.php?i=ghb/ghb_3d.jpg	Still 3D image of the GHB molecule.	Image by Erowid. &copy; 2000 Erowid.org
na-GHB 2D Molecule	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_molecule.php?i=ghb/naghb_2d.gif	Still 2D image of the na-GHB molecule.	Image by Erowid. &copy; 2000 Erowid.org
k-GHB 2D Molecule	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_molecule.php?i=ghb/kghb_2d.gif	Still 2D image of the k-GHB molecule.	Image by Erowid. &copy; 2000 Erowid.org
GBL 2D Molecule	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_molecule.php?i=ghb/gbl_2d.gif	Still 2D image of the GBL molecule.	Image by Erowid. &copy; 2000 Erowid.org

[Health]
notes :: When taken occasionally as a prescribed sleep aid, GHB is a fairly mild, low toxicity chemical. When taken as a recreational intoxicant, it can be dangerous when the dose is too high or it is combined with alcohol or some other drugs. Accidental ingestions, accidental overdoses, idiosyncratic reactions, and mixing GHB with other depressants can lead to vomiting, convulsions, unconsciousness ("GHB coma"), serious hangovers, and sometimes death.	
Regular use of GHB or equivalents can cause marked physical addiction. With 4-6 uses per week (single dose per use) at 'normal' dosages, people report finding that they need to increase their dose somewhat to get the same level of intoxication and many also report that they often feel like they need a little GHB to feel normal.	
With very heavy use (one or more doses per day), many people report very serious physical addiction. Stopping cold turkey results in anxiety, inability to sleep, feeling like the heart is arrhythmic (irregular), and often very unpleasant and potentially dangerous effects. Many heavy users report being able to taper off their use to zero by reducing their intake slowly over 2-3 weeks.	
When taken infrequently with carefully measured doses and no chance of accidental Overdose (this is nearly impossible to guarantee), many people find GHB to be a pleasant alcohol replacement. Unfortunately because its often kept as a clear liquid and even in drinking-water bottles, accidental ingestions are somewhat common. Also, because GHB is generally available as a liquid, it is impossible to know the concentration and thus accidental Overdoses are also common.	
GHB's effects last only a few hours during which it metabolizes into CO2 and H2O leaving no toxic metabolites [Vickers, 1969, Laborit, 1972]. GHB can no longer be detected in urine 4-5 hours after taken by injection [Laborit, 1964]. But its likely that it is detectable for 10-20 hours when taken orally.	
As a sleep aid, GHB induces sleep (unconsciousness). The sleep induced by normal doses of GHB is fairly safe when it has not been mixed with other chemicals, but be aware that it's hard to convince anyone of this if you fall asleep in public and are unable to be awakened. Bar owners, police, and emergency personnel need to be educated about the effects of GHB in order to reduce the problems caused by misinformation. GHB became approved as a pharmaceutical sleep drug for narcoleptics by the FDA in 2002 as "Xyrem".
deaths :: GHB by itself can be fatal. A dozen or two fatalities have been directly tied to GHB or GBL use. Unfortunately, some deaths reported as being caused by GHB were not properly verified and the human body's natural levels of GHB after death could cause misattributions and controversy exists surrounding the issue of how many deaths have actually been caused by GHB.
warnings :: Combination with Alcohol, Sedatives, Hypnotics.   Avoid mixing GHB with alcohol. GHB can be dangerous when used improperly or when mixed with other depressants. Combining a normal GHB dose with alcohol can trigger the overdose reaction of temporarily unrouseable sleep. GHB has been associated with 60 deaths in the US, according to the DEA, though most have involved other drugs (most commonly, alcohol) or high doses.   Although low dose alcohol with low dose GHB is not particularly dangerous, the two drugs' effects are additive and can often result in very unpleasant, nauseating vertigo (spinny head). At higher doses, vomiting, respiratory depression, suppression of gag reflex, etc. become common. Also the slower onset of GHB can result in dangerous and potentially fatal results and people redose alcohol or GHB before the effects have peaked.
Breathing Depression, Vomiting, and Gag Reflex Suppression. GHB may dangerously depress breathing in some people, at very high doses, or in combination with other drugs (primarily alcohol). GHB can also cause vomiting in combination with unconsciousness, which can be a fatal combination. It has also been known to cause breathing similar to Cheynes-Stokes Breathing. GHB has been associated with 60 deaths in the US as of Jan 2000, according to the DEA, though only ~20 have been confirmed as GHB-only deaths.
Dosage and Sensitivity. Be extremely careful with your GHB dose. Just as you don't want to drink 4x the amount of alcohol needed to get you intoxicated, you don't want to ingest more than a single dose of GHB. As with other substances, start low and work up slowly to find your own, individual level.  If you take 3 - 4 times your Personal Threshold Dose, you may find yourself Unconscious and Vomiting.
Sleep, Unconsciousness, and Coma.   If you take a double dose of GHB you may FALL UNCONSCIOUS and be UNROUSEABLE for up to 4 or 5 hours. This is sometimes considered "sleep" as it is prescribed for use by narcoleptics at the same dose that causes unrousable unconsciousness. This unconsciousness is sometimes referred to as a "coma" in medical case reports and texts.  If you take GHB, make sure your friends know about its sleep inducing characteristics.   One of the most common dangers of a mild GHB overdose is being taken to a hospital and treated as if you have OD'd on a depressant. This include stomach pumps, breathing tubes and IV's, not to mention huge hospital bills.
cautions :: null
benefits :: Treatment of Insomnia. GHB is a powerful sleep-inducing drug and has been used to treat insomnia by individuals since at least the 1980s. 2.
Treatment of Sleep Disorders (narcolepsy). GHB (as the patented and trademarked product "Xyrem") was approved in 2002 by the FDA as a treatment for narcolepsy. This treatment is nearly identical to its use in treating general insomnia (although that treatment is not approved by the FDA). Patients take a high dose of GHB (3-10 grams!) and then take a second dose (3-10 grams) when they awake after 3-5 hours. As with Zolpidem and other Z-sleep drugs, GHB causes people to wake up after 3-5 hours. It also causes substantial tolerance with daily use, requiring narcoleptic patients to take around 10 grams of GHB per dose. That dosage level could be dangerous or fatal for small, non-tolerated users. See GHB Patent for Treatment of Narcoleptics.
Treatment of Alcoholism. GHB has been used to keep alcoholics from relapsing and to stop withdrawal symptoms.3. See GHB Patent for Treatment of Alcoholism.
Sleep Improvement and Increase in Growth Hormone. GHB users in the mid 1990s reported that they noticed improved muscle tone and GHB was used widely by weight lifters. Research showed that GHB increases growth hormone production in humans experiments 1.

[Law]
legalTable :: U.S. FEDERAL LEGAL SUMMARY
GHB
REGULATED	Yes
STATUS	Scheduled
SCHEDULE	Schedule I
CLASSIFICATION	Depressant
SCH. DATE	Mar 2000
federalLawText :: GHB is Schedule I in the United States, except when in the form of the prescription drug Xyrem. This means it is illegal to manufacture, buy, possess, or distribute (sell, trade or give) without a DEA license.	
In another bizarre twist of U.S. Drug Law, an exception has been made for one GHB product which has been placed in Schedule III. Despite the fact that Schedule I substances are defined as having no accepted medical use, a New Drug Application was accepted by the FDA for Orphan Pharmaceuticals' (acquired by Jazz Pharmaceuticals in mid-2005) GHB-containing product named Xyrem. It has been approved for use in the treatment of certain types of narcolepsy and sleep disorders. See Orphan's Press Release on the scheduling. Cannabis was also given this contradictory scheduling in the mid 1990's when Marinol was made Schedule III and approved for sale.	
GBL (gamma butyrlactone) has become a List I Chemical federally and is scheduled in some states (California, Hawaii, New York, Oklahoma, Oregon). For information about the legal status of 1,4-butanediol, see the 1,4b Law Vault."	

2002 - The DEA engaged in a very active campaign to reduce GBL, GHB, and 1,4-butanediol sales over the internet, calling their project Operation Webslinger. In late 2002, the DEA arrested a large number of people for buying and selling GBL over the internet.	
2000 - Since its federal scheduling, the grey market sales of GHB on the net and elsewhere have dropped considerably, but have certainly not disappeared. Since most of the GHB available through such channels is of the "bootleg" variety, manufactured by non-professional "kitchen" chemists, concerns about quality and purity should be kept in mind.	
1996 - Beginning in the fall of 1996, GHB started receiving a lot of negative press. This led to fairly rapid changes in its legal status in many U.S. states and eventually led to federal scheduling in March 2000.	

ARRESTS :	Text of the FDA reports on 2 cases of mislabelling (pre-scheduling).
stateLaw :: null
internationalLaw :: Argentina	GBL (gamma-Butyrolactone) was controlled in Argentina in May 2015. See http://infoleg.mecon.gov.ar/infolegInternet/anexos/250000-254999/250265/norma.htm. (Thanks j) (last updated Mar 7 2016)
Australia	Scheduled (Listed as 4-Hydroxy-Butanoic)
Brazil	GHB is controlled and is only legally allowed for medical use. (thanks P)
Canada	GHB was added to Schedule I in 2012 (see http://www.parl.gc.ca/HousePublications/Publication.aspx?Docid=5124131&file=4). after having been made Schedule III in Canada April 1, 1998. Gamma butyrlactone is a Category I chemical in Canada, meaning it can only be sold to account customers or cash sale customers who produce suitable identification. (thanks pgg) (last updated Sep 25 2012)
E.U.	The U.N. Narcotics Commission added GHB to Schedule IV in March 2001
Finland	GHB is a scheduled substance in Finland, making it illegal to possess without a license or prescription [reference]. It has been approved for medicinal use [reference]. (thanks OV & EH)
Germany	GHB Controlled as of March 1, 2002. Added to Anlage III (Schedule III), meaning it can be prescribed by doctors. (BGBl. I S. 358 - 1180)
Israel	In Oct 2003, Israeli Knesset (parliament) voted to add GHB to the list of "dangerous drugs", "making its sale and use illegal" (JPost, Oct 31 2006). In Oct 2006, its Committee on Drug Abuse recommended that the Health Ministry implement a system to track GHB.
Japan	As of Nov 25, 2001, GHB has been illegal to possess without a license in Japan. Some vendors have replaced GHB products with 1,4B and colored the liquid blue. (from KO)
Netherlands	GHB was changed from a "soft drug" into a "hard drug" in 2012. See http://www.nu.nl/politiek/2810800/ghb-lijst-van-harddrugs.html and http://www.vnn.nl/nieuws/bericht/ghb-harddrug-goed-signaal/#sthash.T1agm4Wi.dpbs. GBL is now also a watched and tightly controlled chemical, requiring special licenses to obtain and use. (thanks JB) (last updated Mar 31, 2015)
New Zealand	GHB is Schedule II / Class B in New Zealand.
Norway	GHB is illegal to buy or possess without a special license. See Norway Law. (thanks Y)
Phillipines	It is unclear to us what the status of GHB is in the Phillipines, because the law we have seen seems to confusing include "gamma hydroxyamphetamine (GHB)" in the penalty list and then "60. VINYLBITAL GHB (Gamma-Hydroxyburic acid)" is included in Schedule IV. Phillipine Laws & Statutes - Chan Robles Virtual Law Library.
South Africa	Illegal to possess & sell. November, 2000 GHB was added to Schedule 8, the same Schedule as heroin.
Sweden	GHB and the Law in Sweden, by Rhodium
Switzerland	GHB Controlled as of Jan 1 2002. (no reference)
Thailand	We have been told that GHB became illegal in Thailand in early 2005 and that possession carries a 5-20 year sentence and 400,000 bht fine. This according to a Bangkok Post article from Feb 1, 2005 which we have been unable to access. (thanks S)
U.K.	GHB was placed in Schedule C in the U.K. on June 27, 2003. For more information, see U.K. Home Office. As of December 2007, GBL, which is converted by the body into GHB, is not legally controlled. It is reportedly being sold as GHB for recreational use (see BBC Article).

[Dose]
doseTable :: Oral GHB Dosages
Alcohol Withdrawal Treatment.15 g (3 times daily)
Light.5 - 1.5 g
Common1 - 2.5 g
Strong2 - 4.0 g
Can Induce Heavy Sleep3 - 5 g
Overdose5 - 10 g
Poisoning (Risk of Death)10 + g
Onset : 10 - 20 minutes
Duration : 1 - 3 hours
Normal After Effects : 2 - 4 hours
doseText :: Caution : Values are for pure GHB powder NOT LIQUID !!  As with many substances, regular users or those with a naturally high tolerance to GHB may require somewhat higher doses for the same effects.  GHB generally comes either in pure powder form, or mixed into water. In powder form, measuring a dose is fairly straighforward. In liquid form, GHB comes in a wide variety of concentrations with a single dose ranging from a few drops to a full glass. If you don't know the concentration of your liquid GHB, be extremely careful. There is no way, without testing, to determine its strength. Don't assume anything. Carefully check the concentration with your source before calculating your dosage.  GHB is extremely dose sensitive. Each person has a different response to each dose level. To safely verify the correct dosage, ALWAYS START LOW.    CAUTIONS  If you overdose even slightly on ghb (double dose), you may fall unconscious and be unrouseable for up to 4 or 5 hours. One of the great dangers of a mild GHB overdose is being taken to a hospital and treated as though you have OD'd on a depressant. This can include stomach pumps, breathing tubes and IV's, not to mention huge hospital bills.  GHB can be dangerous when used improperly or when mixed with other depressants. Combining a normal GHB dose with alcohol can trigger the overdose reaction of unrouseable sleep. GHB has been attributed to a few deaths in the US, but most have involved other drugs (most commonly, alcohol) or high doses. Be safe...avoid mixing GHB with alcohol.   If you take 3 - 4 times the normal dose, you may find yourself unconscious and vomiting.   If you take more than 3-4 times your normal dose, there is risk of death.  If you take GHB, make sure your companions know what you're taking, how much of it you've taken and the associated risks.     THEORY : To be as careful as possible in determining correct dosage with GHB, only use material from a reliable source who can vouch for the quality and whom you trust. On an empty stomach (a full stomach delays effects), begin by testing 1/8-1/4 of a single dose to test for personal allergic reactions to the chemical. Try to get a sense of whether GHB feels ok for you. Wait several hours (if not days) before deciding. One or two hours is _NOT_ enough to know, and if you take more you will be compounding doses. Write down your observations, marking time, dosage, and all effects.    If you choose to take GHB again, Increase the dosage in small increments (1/4 dose per event) from this original dose until you find your desired level. This will take several tries, as these GHB trials should be separated by at least a day. Enjoy the experience of low doses and don't be in a hurry to experience a 'strong' GHB dose. GHB is mild. It takes time and energy to find the experience. It doesn't hit you over the head with its effects until you are on the verge of passing out.   Taking GHB too often can cause short term disruptions in your brain chemistry (increases dopamine production). These effects are accumulative. Increased dopamine production can cause unpleasant side effects for days afterward. If you feel sluggish a day after using GHB, you should reduce your consumption to allow your body to recover.  Getting the GHB dose right can be difficult because the effects are often subtle. Many people find GHB to be a good social stimulator. Try listening to music during the peak (T+1-3 hours), dancing, walking, talking, etc.  Many people also find that GHB is not for them. Some people experience nausea, sluggishness, dizziness, among other negative side effects. Listen to your body and heed its warning signals.  Avoid using GHB alone. GHB can be dangerous when used improperly and it's considerably better to have friends around of something goes wrong. It is important to be extremely careful when experimenting with substances that are currently illegal because the quality and dosage of the material can be completely unknown. The effects of GHB aren't good enough to warrant dangerous behaviour. Smoke a bowl. Eat some salad. Go for a walk :)
notes :: null

[Chemistry]
chemTable :: NAME :	Gamma-Hydroxybutyrate
CHEMICAL NAME :	4-Hydroxybutanoic acid
ALTERNATE CHEMICAL NAMES : 	 Gamma-hydroxybutyric acid; 4-hydroxybutyrate; GHB
CHEMICAL FORMULA	C4H8O3
MOLECULAR WEIGHT	104.11
LD50 (of sodium-GHB)	2,000 mg/kg (male rats), 1,650  mg/kg (female rats) i.p.
From the Merck Index 12th Edition
moleculeURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/ghb/images/archive/ghb_3d_mid.jpg
