[Substance]

id :: 89
name :: LSA
url :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/lsa/lsa.shtml
category :: Chemicals
commonNames :: LAA; LA-111; Ergine; Lysergamid
effectsClassification :: Psychedelic
chemicalName :: d-lysergic acid amide
description :: LSA is a naturally occurring psychedelic found in many plants such as morning glory and hawaiian baby woodrose seeds.
imageURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/lsa/images/lsa_summary1.jpg
basicsURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/lsa/lsa_basics.shtml
effectsURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/lsa/lsa_effects.shtml
imagesURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/lsa/lsa_images.shtml
healthURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/lsa/lsa_health.shtml
lawURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/lsa/lsa_law.shtml
doseURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/lsa/lsa_dose.shtml
chemistryURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/lsa/lsa_chemistry.shtml

[Basics]
description :: LSA (d-lysergic acid amide) is a naturally occurring psychedelic with a structure similar to that of LSD (d-lysergic acid diethylamide). Common sources of LSA include the Hawaiian baby woodrose vine (Argyreia nervosa) and various morning glories (Ipomoea species--most often Ipomoea violacea--and Turbina corymbosa), particularly the seeds of these plants. The potency of LSA is between one-tenth and one-twentieth of LSD. It is most often taken orally, although rectal and sublingual administration have both been reported. Pure LSA is not widely sold for recreational use, and the compound is most commonly extracted in small batches for personal use. It produces effects similar to those of LSD, including visuals and altered thinking. Less stimulating that LSD, it can actually be sedating, particularly at higher doses. Nausea and stomach pain have been reported by users who obtain LSA by extraction from plant sources, although these side-effects may be caused in part by other chemicals that such plants may contain. [ Main LSA Vault ]
descriptionSections :: dose	The majority of LSA users have extracted LSA on their own, or simply consumed the source plant seeds. Consumption of whole seeds has been reported as being ineffective, so users most often chew or grind up the seeds. Due to lack of research with pure LSA, reliable information about mass-per-average-dose is not available. When considered in terms of number of seeds from source plants, an average starting dose is typically 4-5 Argyreia nervosa seeds or 20-25 Ipomoea violacea seeds. However, it is worth noting that one researcher found an over ten-fold variation in the alkaloid content of the seeds he tested, with some seeds containing no LSA at all.1
price	Pure LSA is essentially absent from the black market. Plant materials that naturally contain LSA are fairly inexpensive. As of November 2012, Ipomoea violacea seed packets containing 50-150 seeds each could be purchases for around $2.00, a once-ounce packet of these seeds sold for around $4.00 to $6.00, and a one-pound seed sack could be had for $20.00 to $40.00. Argyreia nervosa could be purchased for around $10.00 for 30-50 seeds, or about $300 per kilo of seeds. Prices may vary depending on the seeds' country of origin (A. nervosa are generally sourced from Ghana, Hawaii, and India), as well as the targeted buyer (since some specialty companies marketing toward entheobotanical aficionados appear to charge more).
law	LSA is categorized as a Schedule III depressant in the United States. It is a Class A substance within the United Kingdom, where it is categorized as a precursor to LSD. In New Zealand, Australia, and the Netherlands, LSA is also subject to controlled substance laws. Other countries, such as Canada and Hungary, do not consider LSA to be illegal. The source plants are not widely controlled.
chemistry	d-lysergic acid amide (LSA) is an erogline alkaloid that naturally occurs in several species of plants and fungi.
pharmacology	Pharmacology Summary Needed.
production	LSA was first described in 1932 as a new base obtained as a cleavage product of ergot alkaloids, and it was later synthesized at Sandoz labs by Albert Hofmann. Although LSA can be produced synthetically in a lab, it is more commonly extracted from plant sources. Many people merely grind the seeds of a source plant and perform a simple water extraction. Since this process can also extract other water-soluble chemicals that may be present in the plant material, other users employ more sophisticated methods that result in a product with higher purity.
history	Albert Hofmann first bioassayed the LSA he synthesized in 1947, injecting 500 micrograms intramuscularly. He noted the experience produced slight nausea and caused him to feel "Tired, dreamy, [and] incapable of clear thoughts. "2 Seeds of LSA-containing source plants have been distributed and used recreationally in the United States since the 1960s.
terminology	The Substance:LSA; LAA; LA-111; Devil's Acid; Morning Glory; Utopian Bliss Balls (said to be a mixture of five ground Argyreia nervosa seeds mixed with ginseng, damiana, gotu kola, bee pollen, and dates).
effects :: The first signs of alteration are usually experienced within 25 minutes of administration. Departure from baseline can vary depending on the extraction method used as well as the mode of administration. Early alerts typically include a softening of the visual field and brightening of colors. Stomach pains, nausea, or vomiting are often reported in waves of intensity beginning as early as 20 minutes after ingestion and in some cases can last until baseline has been reached again.
effectsSections :: onset	Depending on how much and how recently one has eaten food, LSA generally takes 20-60 minutes to take effect.
duration	Generally, the plateau is not fully reached until sometime between 1.5 and 2.25 hours after administration. During this "peak" of the experience, and depending on dosage, full closed- and open-eyed visuals can occur, as well as profound changes in perception and consciousness. These can include altered thought processing, feelings of insight, and showing an interest in topics not normally found to be interest. Other effects include physical sedation and dilated pupils. The plateau lasts 2 to 7 hours, followed by a notably rapid return to baseline over 1 to 2 hours. The comedown is recognizable by a strong sensation that a "sober" mind has returned and the visual sensory effects sharply decrease in intensity.
visuals	Visuals Summary Needed.
problems :: Difficult experiences are a possibility when taking LSA. An LSA experience can bring about an extreme alteration in an individual's perception. Recent experiences and issues (life events) can be amplified in intensity while on LSA. Although having recently undergone a negative experience does not guarantee than an individual will not enjoy LSA, it should be noted that--as with the consumption of any psychedelics--unusual states of mind may be encountered and the individual should be prepared for this. Preparation can minimize the chance or severity of a bad experience. The Psychedelic Crisis FAQ provides some information about how to handle difficult situations.
problemsSections :: contraindications	Do not operate heavy machinery. Do Not Drive. Individuals currently in the midst of emotional or psychological upheaval in their everyday lives should be careful about choosing to use psychedelics as they can trigger even more difficulty. There are not yet sufficient studies to definitively link LSA to the triggering of a latent psychological condition or illness such as schizophrenia. However, with LSD and other psychedelic substances this link has been shown to exist. Caution should be exercised. LSA can cause uterine contractions and could negatively impact a pregnancy.
addiction	LSD is not physically addicting, and is quite unlikely to lead to psychological addiction in most people. Withdrawal effects following discontinuation have not been reported. Although psychological addiction to LSA is technically possibly, it is highly unlikely and we are unaware of any such reports. There is a short period of tolerance after use which fades after 48 to 72 hours.
long	Long Term Health Problems Summary Needed.
death	Risk of Death Summary Needed.

[Effects]
duration :: LSA Duration
Oral
Total Duration	5 - 10 hrs
Onset	20 - 40 mins
Coming Up	20 mins - 3 hrs
Plateau	2 - 7 hrs
Coming Down	1 - 2 hrs
&nbsp;	&nbsp;
After Effects	0 - 3 hrs
Hangover / Day After	0 - 72 hrs
positiveEffects :: mood lift	feelings of insight	therapeutic psychological reflection (introspective thoughts and discussions)	increased interest in areas of thought that are normally ignored	increase in giggling and laughing	sensory enhancement (taste, smell, etc.)	closed- and open-eyed visuals including trails, color shifts, brightening, etc.
neutralEffects :: general change in consciousness	pupil dilation	sedation of the body and mind	change in perception of time	looping, patterned, out-of-control thinking	slight increase in heart rate	long lasting "afterglow" of effects
negativeEffects :: increased anxiety/paranoia	nausea/vomiting	muscular tightness, particularly in the legs, back, and jaw	abdominal cramping	confusion	Hallucinogen Persisting Perception Disorder (HPPD)	insomnia
description :: LSA is a psychedelic that produces many of the typical or "classic" effects of other drugs in this category. This includes visual changes such as an enhancement of the perception of color, tracers, and after-images. Emotion and mentation are also strongly affected. Some LSA users experience unusual thought patterns, such as a "looping" of the same thought or perceived experience over a period of time. Often during an LSA experience, users become intrigued by topics and ideas that they normally are not very interested in.	
For up to 3 hours after the effects have primarily ended, users may still notice minor visual alterations in colors and brightness. Some people feel "spacey" or empty headed during this period as well. Even the next day, some people experience a + or 1+ on the "Shulgin Rating Scale". This "afterglow" is usually apparent from changes in normal thought patterns and a slight enhancement of colors and brightness in one's vision. The specific effects that are experienced vary, and are largely dependent on the individual and their recent experiences in life. Some users have expressed that this variability of effect (from mild to extreme, sometimes at similar dose levels) is more pronounced than with other psychedelics from a wide variety of categories (dissociatives, tryptamines, phenethylamines, etc.); however, some of this variability may be due to the relative potency and chemical profile of different plant sources of LSA, and the crude (fairly non-selective) water-based extraction approach that many users employ when preparing their material for consumption. One researcher found an over ten-fold variation in the alkaloid content of the seeds that he tested, with some seeds containing no LSA at all;1 and LSA source plants may also contain additional ergoline alkaloids, such as ergonovine (found to be psychoactive at doses from 2 to 10 mg), elymoclavine and lysergol (found to produce "an excitation syndrome" in animal tests), as well as other chemicals.2
experienceReports :: null

[Images]
imageEntryList :: LSA 2D Molecule	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_molecule.php?i=lsa/lsa_2d.gif	Still 2D image of the LSA molecule.	Image by Erowid. &copy; 2006 Erowid.org
LSA 3D Molecule	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_molecule.php?i=lsa/lsa_3d.jpg	Still 3D image of the LSA molecule.	Image by Erowid. &copy; 2000 Erowid.org
LSA 3D Rotating Molecule	https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/show_molecule.php?i=lsa/lsa__.mol	Rotating 3D image of the LSA molecule.	Image by Erowid. &copy; 2000 Erowid.org

[Health]
notes :: LSA has had very little study of its effects on the human mind and body. As with most psychedelics, the primary health concerns with LSA use relate to its psychological effects rather than risk of physical damage to the body or brain. Extreme temporary changes in thoughts, beliefs, and perception can occur after consumption of LSA. Choices made while under the influence may very be different than the choices the same individual would have made if sober. The use of a "sitter", a non-inebriated third party (preferably someone personally familiar with psychedelics) who watches over the person(s) under the influence, can help avoid unhealthy and/or unsafe decisions.	
However, details related to the possibility that LSA can effectively treat cluster headaches can be found within the 2008 article "Unauthorized Research on Cluster Headache" by R. Andrew Sewell, MD, as well as within his poster (co-written by Kyle Reed and Miles Cunningham, MD, PhD) "Response of Cluster Headache to Self-Administration of Seeds Containing Lysergic Acid Amide (LSA)", presented at the 2008 annual meeting of the American Headache Society.	

Health Issues Due to Source Materials and Extraction Processes.	LSA-containing seeds sold on the commercial market may occasionally be treated with pesticides or fungicides, though the idea that seeds have at any point been coated with poisons specifically to discourage consumption is very likely urban legend. Some vendors specifically market organic/non-treated seeds to avoid this issue.	
Some extraction methods used on LSA-containing seeds involve the use of potentially harmful chemicals. The most common of these are non-polar petroleum-based solvents, such naphtha or diethyl ether. If these chemicals are not handled properly, or if they are not entirely removed from the extracted material, they can be harmful.
deaths :: We are unaware of any deaths directly linked to the consumption of LSA. As with most psychedelics, the risk of death from recreational LSA use, particularly use accompanied by a sober sitter and in people who are not predisposed to suicidal thoughts, is quite low.
warnings :: Precipitation of Psychosis.  Some psychedelic substances have been implicated in triggering mental disease in those who are predisposed to such conditions. Although no research has been done to link LSA specifically to this phenomenon, LSD and other substances have been shown to have this potential. The studies connecting triggered psychotic conditions with psychoactives face many difficult variables. The most prominent of these is the fact that schizophrenia and other mental diseases often initially show symptoms around the same age in a person's life as it is common for individuals to begin experimenting with psychoactive substances. Although no research has proven LSA to be a trigger, individuals with a family history of mental illnesses should be cautious if using LSA or any other psychoactive substance.
HPPD. Hallucinogen Persisting Perceptual Disorder (HPPD) has been reported by individuals who have taken LSA. This has nearly exclusively been reported as lasting effects in the person's visual field. "Long lasting after effects" is a better-suited title for this warning, because a majority of people who experience these effects are untroubled by them. HPPD is not diagnosed medically until the "after effects" interfere with an individual's ability to function normally. See the HPPD Vault for more information. While persistent visual effects have been reported by some people after using LSA, it should be noted that many of these individuals have also used other psychoactive substances, often within a short time period of their LSA use. This makes it difficult to distinguish the degree of after effects that resulted solely from their LSA use.
Other Warnings.  Additional categories of warnings included on Erowid's LSD (Acid) Health Vault include Precipitation of Depression, Dangerous Interaction: Lithium or Tricyclic Antidepressants, and Reduction of Response to LSD when Taken with SSRI and Possibly MAOI Drugs. It is unknown to what degree these warnings may similarly apply to LSA, but based solely on the similar chemical structure of the two compounds, it seems worthwhile for readers to also visit this page (linked above).
cautions :: Dramatic Changes in Thinking.  Part of the LSA experience is an altered thought process. These changes are often what individuals seek when taking the substance. The altered mind state, however, can result in poor or dangerous judgment. Having a sober individual present during the experience is a simple and effective way to safeguard individuals from potentially negative consequences due to their impaired decision-making abilities.
Hangover/Afterglow.  Some people have reported the effects of LSA to mildly linger for 24 to 72 hours after administration of the substance. The effects most often reported to last are: brighter colors and other visual alterations, feelings of detachment from "real life", and unusual thought patterns. Most reports of this extended afterglow are not of a negative nature, but individuals should plan appropriately for this possibility if choosing to use LSA.
Pregnancy. Chemicals structured similarly to LSA are known to cause uterine contractions, which may be problematic or dangerous during a pregnancy.
Breastfeeding. Although LSA is metabolized fairly rapidly, it is likely that LSA can be stored in breast milk until it has left the individual's system. While one day may be sufficient time for LSA to exit an individual's system, it is recommended that LSA users wait three to five days before resuming breastfeeding, in order to insure that none of the substance is passed through breast milk into a nursing baby.
Other Cautions. Additional categories of cautions included on Erowid's LSD (Acid) Health Vault include Hyperthermia/Overheating, Anxiety/Panic Reactions, PTSD, and No Potential for Physical Dependence (Addiction). It is unknown to what degree these cautions may similarly apply to LSA, but based solely on the similar chemical structure of the two compounds, these same cautions may apply to LSA.
benefits :: Positive Effect on Mood and Life. Users of LSA may feel that their use has had a positive effect on their lives, from simple recreational fun to profound life-changing spiritual experiences.
Insights into Self, Others, and World. Many individuals have reported increased philosophical contemplation while using LSA. Such contemplation may include thoughts about oneself, societal interactions, and/or humankind as a whole.
Medical Uses. User reports by people with a severe form of migraine-like headaches called cluster headaches include descriptions of nearly complete blocking of these painful experiences through the use of LSA, LSD, psilocybin, and related compounds. In addition, some users report that--following such use--the frequency with which they have these headaches dramatically diminishes. Research into this arena is ongoing. For more information, see the 2008 article "Unauthorized Research on Cluster Headache" by R. Andrew Sewell, MD, as well as his poster (co-written by Kyle Reed and Miles Cunningham, MD, PhD) "Response of Cluster Headache to Self-Administration of Seeds Containing Lysergic Acid Amide (LSA)", presented at the 2008 annual meeting of the American Headache Society. In addition, considering the historical use of LSD in psychotherapy, addiction treatment, and to reduce end-of-life anxiety, it seems at least possible that LSA could have similar medical applications in these arenas.

[Law]
legalTable :: U.S. FEDERAL LEGAL SUMMARY
LSA
REGULATED	Yes
STATUS	Scheduled
SCHEDULE	Schedule III
CLASSIFICATION	Depressant
federalLawText :: LSA is DEA schedule 3.	
Though LSA is classified as a 'depressant' by U.S. law, it should also be noted that it is a very active hallucinogen/psychedelic.
stateLaw :: null
internationalLaw :: Australia	Consumption of LSA containing materials is prohibited under state legislation in most Australian states. (thanks DM)
Canada	LSA is not listed in Canada's Controlled Drugs and Substances act and is therefore not illegal to possess. It is probably illegal to sell for human consumption as a drug, though the plants that contain it are not controlled in Canada. (unconfirmed) (thanks o) (last updated Jan 8 2011)
Hungary	LSA is not legally classified as a drug, consumption or possession of LSA or LSA containing-materials is not prohibited. (unconfirmed) (thanks J]
Netherlands	LSA is controlled in the Netherlands. This makes it illegal to possess, distribute, and produce without a license. (unconfirmed) (thanks R1)
New Zealand	Chemical LSA is controlled as a drug in New Zealand. The plants and seeds of morning glory species are legal to possess, cultivate, buy, and distribute. Seeds are reportedly sprayed and warnings included on the packets not to consume the seeds. (unconfirmed) (thanks B) (last updated Sep 12 2010)
Poland	Status of LSA as chemical unknown. LSA-containg plants appear to be uncontrolled in poland. (unconfirmed) (thanks D)
Sweden	Sweden is planning to control a number of chemicals as of May 1, 2007 including LSA, 2C-T-4, DXM, and DOI. (thanks P) (March 2007)
United Kingdom	LSA is a Class A substance within the United Kingdom, categorized as a precursor to LSD (Misuse of Drugs Act 1971)

[Dose]
doseTable :: null
doseText :: LSA is a naturally occuring psychedelic chemical with a potency 1/10 to 1/30th that of LSD. It has some similarities in effect to LSD, but is generally considered much less stimulating and can be sedating. Structurally LSA and LSD are quite similar.  Dosages of LSA is not well established since few have experimented with the pure chemical and recorded their experiences publicly. Albert Hofmann tried an I.M. injection of 500 micrograms of LSA and found the effects medium-strong. Albert Hofmann later reported that "The effective dose of lysergic acid amide is 1 to 2 mg by oral application." in Road to Eleusis (1978).    Quotes Regarding Dosage & Effects of LSA  "Grof: Have you actually tried the ololiuhqui yourself? [uh-lowlee-uh-kee] Hofmann: Yes, I did. But, of course, it is about ten times less active; to get a good effect, you need one to two milligrams. Grof: And what was that experience like? Hofmann: The experience had some strong narcotic effect, but at the same time there was a very strange sense of voidness. In this Void, everything loses its meaning. It is a very mystical experience." (Stanislav Grof Interviews Dr. Albert Hofmann. MAPS Bulletin 11.2, Fall 2001.)  "Hofmann first established [LSA's] effect in 1947, 13 years before it was known to be the active principle in ololiuhqui... He showed that the drug was active at doses of 500 micrograms to 1 milligram. No entheogenic effect was noticed by Hofmann after taking 2 milligrams of isoergine, although sedative symptoms similar to ergine inebriation were prominent. Hofmann's description of perceiving the 'unreality and complete meaninglessness of the outside world' after taking 2 millgrams of isoergine (Hofmann 1963a), however, sounds like the paradoxical depressent effect experienced commonly with the threshold doses of psilocybine and other entheogens and it is possible that isoergine is entheogenic at higher doses." (Ott Pharmacotheon 1993, pg. 128)
notes :: null

[Chemistry]
chemTable :: NAME :	LSA
CHEMICAL NAME :	9,10-didehydro-6-methylergoline-8&beta;carboxaminde
ALTERNATE CHEMICAL NAMES :	d-lysergic acid amide; lysergamide; LA-111; Ergine; Ergin; Lysergs&auml;ure amid
CHEMICAL FORMULA	C16H17N3O
MOLECULAR WEIGHT	267.33
MELTING POINT	242&#176; C (from methanol); 232&#176; C methanesulfonate (from methanol/acetone)
LDLo (lowest pub. lethal dose)	2500 ug/kg i.v.(rabbit)
moleculeURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/lsa/images/archive/lsa_3d_mid.jpg
