[Substance]

id :: 115
name :: Nicotine
url :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/nicotine/nicotine.shtml
category :: Chemicals
commonNames :: Nicotine
effectsClassification :: Stimulant
chemicalName :: (S)-3-(1-Methylpyrrolidin-2-yl)pyridine
description :: Nicotine is a naturally occurring stimulant found in tobacco (Nicotiana spp.) and other solanaceous plants. At room temperature, it is an oily liquid. As a constituent of tobacco, it has been used for many centuries in the Americas and Australia, and is now sold in a variety of common products worldwide.
imageURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/nicotine/images/nicotine_summary1.jpg
basicsURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/nicotine/nicotine_basics.shtml
lawURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/nicotine/nicotine_law.shtml
doseURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/nicotine/nicotine_dose.shtml
chemistryURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/nicotine/nicotine_chemistry.shtml

[Basics]
description :: Nicotine is a psychoactive alkaloid that is most commonly administered through smoking or chewing the leaves of the tobacco plant (Nicotiana tabacam and Nicotiana rustica), although starting the late 20th century nicotine gums and other products began to be widely used. Nicotine has a long history of use in its natural form and remains a widely-accepted and commonly-used psychoactive substances, despite being highly addictive and linked to serious health problems. Anti-smoking regulations and media campaigns have substantially reduced use of nicotine in Europe and North America in the last 20 years. [ Main Nicotine Vault ]
descriptionSections :: dose	As of 2004, testing showed that the average cigarette contained 12+ mg of nicotine and delivered approximately 1.2-1.8 mg to the smoker. Nicotine gum products are sold with dosages up to 4 mg per piece in the United States. Transdermal patches are sold that deliver around .88 mg, .58 mg, and .29 mg per hour for 24 hours. Intranasal (nasal spray) doses are similar to smoked doses.
price	Nicotine is most frequently administered through tobacco cigarettes. In the United States a pack of 20 cigarettes ranges in price from $3-$6 (15-30 cents apiece). Nicotine gum, marketed as a smoking-ceasation tool, costs approximately 50-80 cents for each piece of gum containing 2 mg of nicotine. Transdermal patches cost 1-4 USD per day-use patch.
law	Nicotine is regulated by numerous state and federal laws in the United States, but is not scheduled under the Controlled Substances Act. In most states it is legal to purchase by persons over the age of 18. Nictoine regulation is also complex internationally.
chemistry	Nicotine is an alkaloid similar to others found in tobacco, such nornicotine and anabasine which exhibit similar pharmacological effects. Nicotine content varies considerably between different tobacco species; in N. rustica it can be as high as 18%, while it rarely exceeds 9% in N. tabacum. It is primarily found in the leaves of these plants, though it occurs in flowers, stems, and roots as well. Nicotine is an oily liquid at room temperature (Merck)
pharmacology	Pharmacology Summary Needed.
production	Production Summary Needed.
history	Tobacco was probably first cultivated in either Peru or Mexico. The plant has a long tradition of shamanic and cultural use in North and South America, as well as in the interior of Australia, where it was grown and used prior to the arrival of Europeans.  Nicotine is named for French diplomat Jean Nicot de Villemain who advocated the use of tobacco in Europe in the late 1500s. The pure chemical was first isolated in Germany in 1828 and was first synthesized in 1893. During the first half of the 20th Century, there was great debate about the potential health risks associated with cigarette smoking, leading to significant attempts by many countries to reduce smoking rates. The first nicotine gum was approved in the U.S. as a prescription smoking cessation drug in 1984, followed by nicotine patches in 1992. Both became available over-the-counter in 1996.
terminology	Brand Names:Nicorette (Gum); Nicoderm (Patch); Habitrol (Patch); Nicotrol (Patch). The Substance:Nicotine. The Experience:No common terms known.
effects :: Nicotine exerts paradoxical effects, acting as both a stimulant and a relaxant. It causes increased heart rate and blood pressure while also acting as a muscle relaxant and reducing anxiety. It suppresses appetite and causes increased bowel activity. Initial exposure may result in nausea, dizziness, or light-headedness.   The experiential effects of nicotine change with habituation. Those new to the drug often experience light-headedness and strong mental effects where those who use nicotine regularly do not generally experience those effects. Over time, the effects of nicotine are not only calming but are said to enhance attentional focus and increase the pleasure of other activities. Research published in 2006 by Kenny and Markou suggested that nicotine "resets the sensitivity of reward systems to a new increased level, thereby impriting an indelible 'memory' of its effects". In other words, smoke a cigarette and eat an apple, the apple seems to be just a little more satisfying than the apple without the cigarette.  Nicotine may provide some beneficial effects on certain psychiatric conditions and has been preliminarily shown to slow onset of Parkinson's Disease symptoms. It's stimulating effects may be used by ADHD sufferers as a self-treatment, although its beneficial effects on attention disorders has not been established in the scientific literature. Nicotine tends to reduce appetite, even in regular users.
effectsSections :: onset	When smoked, nicotine absorbtion is very rapid and effects are almost immediate. Chewing tobacco results in slower onset, but longer duration of effects. Chewing nicotine gum, effects begin in 2-10 minutes.
duration	After smoking a single tobacco cigarette, primary effects persist for approximately 10-45 minutes, with lingering effects for one to two hours. Orally ingested nicotine lasts 45-120 minutes, with lingering effects lasting several hours.
visuals	Visuals Summary Needed.
problems :: Nicotine is highly toxic in humans at high doses and deaths have been caused by ingesting water that had cigarettes steeped in it. In non-tolerated users, 1-4 mg of nicotine can cause a sense of overstimulation, nausea, vertigo, and dysphoria. Nicotine poisonings occur from skin contact with tobacco plants, contact with nicotine-containing pesticides, after intentional oral ingestion (suicides), and young children accidentally eating tobacco products. The U.S. Center for Disease Control reports the "fatal human dose has been estimated to be about 50 to 60 mg [Lazutka et al. 1969]" (CDC.gov).  Although many of the health problems associated with tobacco products are related to smoking and other chemicals in the tobacco, nicotine is associated with a number of health problems when taken chronically. Nicotine causes vasoconstriction, increased heart rate, and increased blood pressure. Over time, these effects are associated with increase risk of cardio vascular problems (heart attack), poor blood circulation in the extremities, and stroke. (U.S. Surgeon General's Report 2004)
problemsSections :: contraindications	Heart problems (particularly cardiac arrhythmia) Many respiratory ailments or illnesses may be exacerbated by smoking Nicotine use during pregnancy may result in lower birth weight Those with circulatory problems or those at risk of stroke
addiction	Nicotine is widely regarded as one of the most addictive substances known. Physical dependence often occurs very rapidly and can be very difficult to overcome. Withdrawal symptoms include headache, nausea, constipation, insomnia, agitation, and long-lasting mild anhedonia.
long	Long Term Health Problems Summary Needed.
death	Risk of Death Summary Needed.

[Law]
legalTable :: U.S. FEDERAL LEGAL SUMMARY
Nicotine
REGULATED	Yes
STATUS	Varies depending on product
SCHEDULE	Un-Scheduled
federalLawText :: Nicotine is available over-the-counter in many forms and from many types of stores. Pure nicotine-containing products such as gums and patches are regulated very differently than tobacco-containing products such as cigarettes and chewing tobacco [see Tobacco Law]. Possession of nicotine is legal, although sales of most non-tobacco nicotine-containing products are regulated by the FDA as drugs. In most states is it illegal to sell or distribute nicotine-containing products to individuals under a certain age.	
In March 2000 the United States Supreme Court ruled that the FDA does not have jurisdiction over tobacco products.	
Nicotine is also sold in pesticides in many countries and is regulated under completely different rules for products not intended for human consumption.
stateLaw :: U.S. STATE LAW	In the United States, there are federal rules and guielines, but each state also has
In the United States, there are federal rules and guielines, but each state also has	its own tobacco-product regulations. For information about tobacco-related laws, see the Tobacco Law Vault, this page is dedicated to nicotine-specific laws and regulations.
California	California bans the use and possession of nicotine-containing products in public schools and school activities (CALIFORNIA EDUCATION CODE SECTION 48900-48927). Vaporizers: Los Angeles County banned the use of nicotine vaporizers anywhere that smoking would be disallowed in March 2014, taking effect in April 2014. See http://the420times.com/2014/03/l-a-s-vape-ban-could-be-bad-news-for-mmj-users/. (last updated Mar 5, 2014)
Massachusetts	"Massachusetts General Law chapter 94 section 307B and Department of Public Health Regulations 105 660.000 mandate that cigarette companies report each year to the Department the nicotine yield ratings for all cigarette brands with a U.S. market share of greater than 1.5%." (See CHANGE IN NICOTINE YIELDS 1998 - 2004, Massachusetts Department of Public Health)
internationalLaw :: INTERNATIONAL LAW	This section is for nicotine-chemical or purified extracts containing nicotine legal information. For information about tobacco-related laws, see the Tobacco Law Vault.

[Dose]
doseTable :: Smoked Nicotine Dosages
Threshold0.2 - 0.3 mg
Light0.3 - 0.8 mg
Common0.6 - 1.5 mg
Strong1 - 2 mg
Heavy2 - 4 mg
Onset : 5 - 60 seconds
Duration : 10 - 30 minutes
Normal After Effects : 1 - 3 hours
doseText :: Nicotine is the primary psychoactive constituent of tobacco. It is found in cigarettes, chewing tobacco, and rolling tobacco, as well as in nicotine patches, gum, inhalers, and nasal spray.  It is important to note that nicotine-product users moderate their use of the products to adjust the level of their effects: smokers can hold the smoke for a shorter duration, let the cigarette burn longer between inhalations, not smoke an entire cigarette, or other similar techniques to make small adjustments to the dose of nicotine received from smoking.     Smoked Nicotine Dosages Threshold0.2 - 0.3 mg Light0.3 - 0.8 mg Common0.6 - 1.5 mg Strong1 - 2 mg Heavy2 - 4 mg    Onset : 5 - 60 seconds Duration : 10 - 30 minutes Normal After Effects : 1 - 3 hours          Oral Nicotine Dosages Light.5 - 2 mg Common1 - 4 mg Strong2 - 6 mg    Onset : 2 - 15 minutes Duration : 1 - 2 hours Normal After Effects : 3 - 6 hours        Intranasal (Nasal Spray) Nicotine Dosages Threshold0.2 - 0.3 mg Light0.3 - 1.0 mg Common0.8 - 2.0 mg Strong1.5 - 4 mg Heavy3 - 8 mg     Onset : 20 - 90 seconds Duration : 10 - 30 minutes Normal After Effects : 1 - 3 hours      CIGARETTES Smoked cigarettes deliver widely varying amounts of nicotine depending mainly on the specific product and how they are smoked. There are differing standards for how to determine the "nicotine yield" from a smoked cigarette. The Massachusetts state government method for testing nicotine yield results in much higher reported doses: "the average from using the historical method was 0.90 mg/cigarette while the average from the Massachusetts method was 1.89 mg/cigarette." (Change in Nicotine Yields 1998-2004, MDPH).  The older method for testing cigarette nicotine yield showed nicotine dosages per cigarette in the .13 to 2.0 mg range, but the Massachusetts method shows nicotine yields between 1 mg and 3 mg. Actual nicotine delivery to a human can be and has been validated by testing urine of cigarette smokers, but this is a costly and time consuming procedure and is not used for determining nicotine yields for the available cigarette brands.  Research actually looking at the blood plasma of Cigarette smokers has shown that up to 3.0 mg of nicotine may be received from a single cigarette. (Benowitz 1998)  See The Nicotine and Tar content of 25 cigarette brands for a list of individual nicotine contents.  NICOTINE GUM Sold in 2.0 and 4.0 mg per piece of gum. In a 4.0 mg piece, 3.4 - 4.0 mg is considered bio-available (According to Physicians Desk Reference)  NICOTINE TRANSDERMAL PATCH Transdermal patches are sold designed to deliver nicotine slowly over 24 hours, with 21 mg, 14 mg, and 7 mg per patch, deliving around .88 mg, .58 mg, and .29 mg per hour for 24 hours. Some users and some researchers apply more than one patch at a time to achieve stronger effects. (Benowitz 1998)  REFERENCES  Perkins K, Fonte C, Sanders M, et al. "Threshold doses for nicotine discrimination in smokers and non-smokers". Psychopharmacology. May 2001; 155(2):163-70. [ Abstract ] Scherer G, von Maltzan C, von Meyerinck L, Westphal K, Adlkofer F. "Biomonitoring after controlled exposure to environmental tobacco smoke (ETS)". Exp Pathol. 1989;37(1-4):158-63. [ Abstract ] Physicians Desk Reference (PDR). 2000. [ Erowid Library ] CHANGE IN NICOTINE YIELDS 1998 - 2004, Massachusetts Department of Public Health). [ Full Text ] More Nicotine Madness, Jack Shafer, Slate.com, Jan 2007 InChem Nicotine Summary Benowitz NL, Zevin S, Jacob P 3rd. "Suppression of nicotine intake during ad libitum cigarette smoking by high-dose transdermal nicotine". J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1998;287(3):958-62. [Abstract ]
notes :: null

[Chemistry]
chemTable :: NAME :	Nicotine
ALT. CHEMICAL NAMES :	(S)-3-(1-Methyl-2-pyrrolidinyl)pyridine; 1-methyl-2-(3-pyridyl)pyrrolidine; &#946;-pyridyl-&#945;-N-methylpyrrolidine
CHEMICAL FORMULA	C10H14N2
MOLECULAR WEIGHT	162.23
MELTING POINT	90&#176; C
BOILING POINT	123-125&#176; C
SOLUBILITY	Very soluble in alcohol, chloroform, ether, petroleum ether, kerosene, and oils.
CAS #	.
From the Merck Index 12th Edition
moleculeURL :: https://www.erowid.org/chemicals/nicotine/images/archive/nicotine_3d_mid.jpg
